[Articel] [WIP] Immutable Data Structures (#1099)
qdrant/landing_page: qdrant-landing/content/articles/immutable-data-structures.md

---

## Data Structures 101

Those who took programming courses might remember that there is no such thing as a universal data structure.
Some structures are good at accessing elements by index (like arrays), while others shine in terms of insertion efficiency (like linked lists).

{{< figure src="/articles_data/immutable-data-structures/hardware-optimized.png" alt="Hardware-optimized data structure" caption="Hardware-optimized data structure" width="80%" >}}

However, when we move from theoretical data structures to real-world systems, and particularly in performance-critical areas such as [vector search](/use-cases/), things become more complex. [Big-O notation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Big_O_notation) provides a good abstraction, but it doesn’t account for the realities of modern hardware: cache misses, memory layout, disk I/O, and other low-level considerations that influence actual performance.

> From the perspective of hardware efficiency, the ideal data structure is a contiguous array of bytes that can be read sequentially in a single thread. This scenario allows hardware optimizations like prefetching, caching, and branch prediction to operate at their best.

> However, real-world use cases require more complex structures to perform varios operations like insertion, deletion, and search.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, real-world use cases require more complex structures to perform various operations like insertion, deletion, and search.
```

small typo

This time around, we will focus on the latest additions to Qdrant: 
- **the immutable hash map with perfect hashing** 
- **defragmented vector storage**.

### Perfect Hashing

A hash table is one of the most commonly used data structures implemented in almost every programming language, including Rust.
It provides fast access to elements by key, with an average time complexity of O(1) for read and write operations.

There is, however, the assumption that should be satisfied for the hash table to work efficiently: *hash collisions should not cause too much overhead*.

In regular mutable hash tables, this might be achieved by multiple strategies:

* making the hash table bigger so the probability of collision is lower
* using a linked list or a tree to store multiple elements with the same hash

However, these strategies have overheads, which become more significant if we consider using high-latency storage like disk.

Indeed, every read operation from disk is order of magnitude slower than reading from RAM, so we want to know the correct location of the data from the first attempt.

> In order to achieve this, we can use a so-called perfect hash function (PHF).
> This a special type of hash function is constructed specifically for a given set of keys, and it guarantees no collisions while using minimal memory.

Reviewer 2: The RAM usage for the function itself is noticeable (as stated below in the article), so I'd like to replace "minimal memory" with e.g. "minimal amount of buckets".

```suggestion
In order to achieve this, we can use a so-called minimal perfect hash function (MPHF).
This a special type of hash function is constructed specifically for a given set of keys, and it guarantees no collisions while using minimal amount of buckets.
```

---

And if you stick with the word "bucket", we'd better to introduce it beforehand, e.g.
```diff
 There is, however, the assumption that should be satisfied for the hash table to work efficiently: *hash collisions should not cause too much overhead*.
+In a hash table, each key is mapped to a "bucket," a slot where the value is stored.
+When different keys map to the same bucket, a collision occurs.
```

In Qdrant, we decided to use *fingerprint-based minimal perfect hash function* implemented in the [ph create](https://crates.io/crates/ph) by [Piotr Beling](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3596453).
According to our benchmarks, using the perfect hash function does introduce some overhead in terms of hashing time, but it significantly reduces the time for the whole operation:

| Volume | `ph::Function` | `std::hash::Hash` | `HashMap::get`|
|--------|----------------|-------------------|---------------|
| 1000   |   60ns         |  ~20ns            |   34ns        |
| 100k   |   90ns         |  ~20ns            |   220ns       |
| 10M    |   238ns        |  ~20ns            |   500ns       |

Even thought the absolute time for hashing is higher, the time for the whole operation is lower, because PHF guarantees no collisions.
The difference is even more significant when we consider disk read time, which 
might up to several milliseconds (10^6 ns).

> PHF RAM size scales linearly for `ph::Function`: 3.46 kB for 10k elements,  119MB for 350M elements.

Reviewer 2: Maybe add a total size of the keys for comparison?
